#Introduction
The art form of music is inexorably a product of its time and place in history. A composer is shaped by the environment around them, which in turn directly influences the pieces they will compose. In this way, music can be viewed as a mirror with which we can view the reflections of history. The aim of this project is to elaborate upon past work and research to illuminate new ways in which big data can be useful in the discipline of music history. We believe that the quantitative methods explored in this project and others like it can provide an extremely useful, large-scale counterpoint to the small-scale type research which has typified the field of music history in the past. With the use big data and modern digital research tools we can detect the large-scale trends and changes in musical traditions that have otherwise not been apparent or even possible to consider. In this project we have provided several examples with visualizations in order to help elucidate a few of the approaches which could be useful for future music historians working with big data.

#Transparency Report
The data set that was used for this project was made available to us by the ‘Big Data of Music History’ project. They made the data which they used available to the public in various formats in the hopes of inspiring further research. We downloaded the data in .csv format directly from the project’s website, which includes a brief description of how they treated the data before its use in the project. The data was exported from MARC using MarcEdit, and cleaned with various tools such as OpenRefine. The process of cleaning the data required the help of the British Library due to the complicated nature of the library cataloging standards, which in this case spanned several centuries. The data was then saved as .csv files, which we were able to work with in constructing our visuals for the project.
