#Digital Methods and Historical Scholarship
Although the use of big data in the realm of music history is still in its relative infancy, the idea of collecting and using quantitative data in other facets of the humanities is not a new practice. One example which I believe directly influenced the ‘Big Data in Music History’ collaboration and therefore can be indirectly credited with getting the ball rolling for this project is the work of literary scholar Franco Moretti. In his 2013 book of the same name, Moretti developed the idea of “distant reading” in which he analyzed titles, publication notes, and bibliographical details of novels in order to expose what he deemed “the great unseen” facts regarding the literary canon of the 18th and 19th centuries. As a corollary to his ideas, historical musicologists can now use the same data to hear what has since been referred to as the “great unheard” facts that exist within the history of music.
Although the ‘Big Data in Music History’ project was the most significant stride forward in this field, there were efforts to digitize music history data that occurred before this.Early Music Online, or EMO, digitized information on 320 anthologies of sixteenth century music. The catalogue records for this project, which were created in the 19th century, only included the title of each book and the name of the publication. As part of the EMO project, this data was updated to include information like the names of composers, titles of compositions, printers, publishers, dedicatees, and former owners. The work done during the EMO project has already proved itself a valuable scholarly resource, which has been particularly useful in studies which analyze music publishing.
Another successful project in the digitization of music history is the Répertoire International des Sources Musicales, or RISM. Since the 1950s, RISM has been collecting data from libraries across the world on printed and manuscript music, and now holds the most comprehensive digitized body of data on musical sources between 1500 and 1800. Although the RISM contains wide geographical coverage, the data is most concentrated on the sixteenth through nineteenth centuries, which presents a limitation on its uses. Another resource for music history data are the catalogues of the British Library, which not only contain vast amounts of catalogue records of printed music in Britain, but i bolstered by a great number of records from overseas. The EMO project, the RISM, and the British Library’s efforts were all pivotal in creating perhaps the largest work of digital scholarship on the subject “A Big Data History of Music”.
The Big Data History of Music project was an AHRC-funded collaboration between the Royal Holloway Academy at the University of London and the British Library. The aim of the project was to combine resources in order to create the world’s largest sets of digital data regarding sheet music, and to make this information available to future researchers. Using data analytics and digital visualization methods through a series of case studies, the project was able to demonstrate how this data unlocks new ways of looking at music history. The project ended with a hackathon on the project data at the British Library on 10 March, 2015 and a symposium entitled ‘Digital Strategies for Historical Musicologists’ on the following day.
Just as the “Big Data History of Music” project would not have been possible if not for the previous efforts such as EMO, and the RITM; our project could not have existed without the efforts the Royal Holloway Academy. The making of their data available allowed us to continue to look into how big data and digital scholarship will change the ways we view music history.

#Next Steps
Approaching music history with big data allows the field of music history to be explore in new and exciting ways. In the past music databases were set up to be primarily searched by the name of the composer, yet with datasets such as those created in the ‘Big History of Music’ project, partial transcriptions of title-pages can be searched. This allows detection of distinctions such as which instrument the piece is scored for, ethnic connotations (i.e. ‘Turkish’), or even relation to historic events (i.e. ‘Waterloo’). These types of analyses expose wide-scale musical trends which in turn can illuminate greater historical changes, be they political, social, economic or otherwise.
The power of big musical data is being looked into not only for its value to scholars and historians, but also for its application in the music industry. The music-streaming company Spotify collects four terabytes of data from its listeners daily, and currently have a total of twenty-eight petabytes of storage in four data centres across the world. Most of the data is used for user-centric purposes but is also used in forecasting information and data analytics. In 2013 Spotify used its data to try and predict the year’s Grammy award winner. In the end, four out of six of Spotify’s predictions were correct. Other researchers in the music industry hope to be able to use data analytics in the future to learn more about trends in music in the hopes of being able to predict the next big hit. These are just a few of many different ways in which data will be used in the future to shape both the history and future of music.

#Bibliography
Afanador-Llach, Maria José, Antonio Rojas Castro, Adam Crymble, Víctor Gayol, Fred Gibbs, Caleb McDaniel, Ian Milligan, Amanda Visconti, and Jeri Wieringa, eds. The Programming Historian. 2nd ed., 2017. http://programminghistorian.org/
“A Big Data History of Music.” Royal Holloway University of London. Accessed April 03, 2017.
https://www.royalholloway.ac.uk/music/research/abigdatahistoryofmusic/home.aspx
Andrew Gustar; “Quantitative Perspectives.” Early Music 2015; 43 (2): 365-366. doi: 10.1093/em/cav033
https://academic.oup.com/em/article-abstract/43/2/365/399147/Quantitative-perspectives?redirectedFrom=fulltext
John F. Barber; “Sound and Digital Humanities: Reflecting on a DHSI Course.” Digital Humanities Quarterly, vol. 10 (2016). Accessed on April 1st, 2017.
http://digitalhumanities.org:8081/dhq/vol/10/1/000239/000239.html
“OpenRefine.” http://openrefine.org/
This is the program which was used to clean the data.
Raw Graphs. http://rawgraphs.io
This website was useful for ideas regarding potential ideas for visualizations for the project.
Sandra Tuppen, Stephen Rose, and Loukia Drosopoulou. “Library Catalogue Records as a Research Resource: Introducing ‘A Big Data History of Music,” Fontes Artis Musicae, vol. 63 (2016): accessed on April 1st, 2017.
https://pure.royalholloway.ac.uk/portal/files/26278306/Tuppen_Rose_Drosopoulou_Library_Catalogue_Records_as_a_research_resource_.pdf
Stephen Rose, Sandra Tuppen, Loukia Drosopoulou; “Writing a Big Data History of Music.” Early Music 2015; 43 (4): 649-660. doi: 10.1093/em/cav071. Accessed on April 3rd, 2017.
https://academic.oup.com/em/article/43/4/649/338731/Writing-a-Big-Data-history-of-music
Tableau Data Visualization. https://www.tableau.com/solutions/topic/data-visualization
